[WHOOSHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory, and we have
a very special guest for you
today.
Because all of us,
one day, will be faced
with the possibility of dying.
And the big question is, can you
die in a very comfortable way?
Dr. Jessica Nutik
Zitter is with us,
a national advocate
for transforming
the way people die in America.
That's right, I
said die in America.
And she works as an attending
physician at the Highland
Hospital in Oakland,
California and is
the author of an amazing book
called "Extreme Measures."
Jessica, welcome to
the program, doctor.
>>JESSICA ZITTER: Thank
you so much for having me.
>>NOORY: You were on the radio
show with me about a year
or so ago.
Thank you for that.
>>ZITTER: I think
it might have been
two years ago when
my book and the movie
came out at the same time.
And I was in this
whirlwind craziness.
So that's been a while.
>>NOORY: Were you
all over the country?
>>ZITTER: Yes.
It was a very crazy time.
>>NOORY: When you went
to medical school,
you went there to become what?
>>ZITTER: I went there
to become a doctor.
And the kind of
doctor I wanted to be
was an intensive doctor who
used technology and treatments
and saved people's lives.
So I became an intensive care
pulmonary and critical care
doctor.
>>NOORY: At what
point did you switch
into the area we're going to
talk about on the program now?
>>ZITTER: It took a while.
I bought into this
idea that medicine
was about doing intensive
things to people,
using machinery and new
and emerging technologies
to save life, to scoop people
out from the jaws of death.
And it took me,
actually, several years
of this subtle realization
that I wasn't even talking
about that I was, actually,
sometimes doing more
harm than good to my patients.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>ZITTER: I was actually sort
of stringing their bodies along,
even patients who
I knew were dying.
But I was kind of keeping
them alive as long as I
could at the ends of machines.
>>NOORY: Isn't that your
job, to keep them alive
as long as you can?
>>ZITTER: That's
what I had thought.
And so my job was simply
focused on the physiology of how
do I keep the heart pumping
as long as possible,
for every possible nanosecond?
>>NOORY: Ah, just the heart.
>>ZITTER: Just the heart.
>>NOORY: But what
about the person?
>>ZITTER: That's right.
I forgot about the person.
I wasn't taught
about the person.
I had never been trained--
and in fact, I
became less and less
able to look at
the whole person.
Because I became so focused
in on the physiology
and the machines and
the disease diagnosis,
as opposed to the person,
their reality, their family,
their personal goals
and preferences.
And that's what eventually
changed my approach.
>>NOORY: But this isn't
quite hospice, is it?
>>ZITTER: No.
So let me tell you a
little bit about what
that change was that I made,
that philosophical change.
>>NOORY: All right.
Sure.
>>ZITTER: In the early
2000s, I happened to be,
by total chance--
I feel like it was some
kind of a force from above--
by total chance, in a hospital
that was at the forefront--
a small little
hospital in Newark,
New Jersey-- at the
forefront of a new
approach to caring for patients
in the intensive care unit.
They had won this grant
that had been very coveted.
But only four hospitals
won it in the United States
out of about 400 applications.
>>NOORY: That's impressive.
>>ZITTER: It was
really exciting.
But I didn't know
anything about it.
All I knew was, all
of a sudden, there's
this family support team
in the intensive care unit.
They had won this
grant to enhance
communication between the
physicians and the patients.
And I thought,
why do I need you?
I already know how
to communicate.
I'm a good speaker.
I can communicate.
And they started to introduce
me to this new field, which
didn't even really become
recognized until 2008, called
palliative medicine.
>>NOORY: It's only that--
>>ZITTER: It's new.
>>NOORY: --that old?
It's a new field.
And the point, the
real thrust, of that
subspecialty, which I
would go on to learn,
was that it was about
focusing on the whole patient,
on a healthy,
communicative relationship,
on making decisions with
them-- the health care team
and the patient and
their family-- together
that were really
tailored to the person,
something I had never
thought about, never
been taught how to do.
And so this family
support team would come in
and criticize what I was doing.
And in fact, one day, I
had an epiphany moment
when the nurse, the head
of that team, came in.
And I was putting a big
catheter into someone's neck
who was dying.
And I knew this
person was dying.
But it was the next thing to do.
And she looked at me,
and she stood there.
She put her hand up
to her face like it
was a pretend telephone.
And she said, call the police.
They're torturing a
patient in the ICU.
>>NOORY: Jeez!
And you hear this, right?
>>ZITTER: I heard this.
>>NOORY: You're shocked.
>>ZITTER: And I was shocked,
and I was defensive,
and I was angry.
But over the next few
days, it seeped into me.
And it met with this
growing moral distress
that I had been experiencing
over the previous several years
that told me that
something was missing.
And I went to her, and I
said, OK, you know what?
Teach me how to
do it differently.
And so she introduced
me to palliative care.
And then I became boarded
in palliative care medicine.
And then I started to
practice both intensive care
and palliative.
And it was the beginning of a
big philosophical shift for me.
>>NOORY: Now, was she saying
don't inject this patient?
Don't try to help him?
>>ZITTER: She was saying a lot
of things in that one sentence.
And I always refer back to
it as my epiphany moment.
And by the way, if you see
this movie on Netflix--
"Extremis," which is
the movie that came out
two years ago that follows me
around in the intensive care
unit--
I talk about that moment.
>>NOORY: You talk
about that case.
>>ZITTER: Because it's such
a sentinel moment in my life.
What she was saying
was many things.
She was saying, why are you
doing this procedure that you
and I both know
isn't going to help,
and you never even
told the husband
that it wasn't going to help?
You just let him
believe that you
were going to just be able
to help by doing one more
thing and one more thing.
You never actually
were honest with him.
Where was the communication
and the human interaction
between you and that patient?
That was one of the
things she was telling me.
There were many other
things that she was saying.
But that was the gripping
piece of it for me.
>>NOORY: And did you not even
know that this kind of care
existed?
>>ZITTER: I didn't.
Let me say something
controversial about
palliative care right now.
The fact is the things
that palliative care tries
to emphasize-- which are
communication, preferences,
honoring a particular person's
preferences and values,
eliciting those
thinking about treating
their suffering,
all the kinds of suffering
they may be experiencing,
whether it's spiritual or
physical or emotional--
that is all stuff,
when you really
think about it, that shouldn't
require a subspecialty.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>ZITTER: That's
stuff that should
be able to be dealt with by
every intensive care unit
doctor, every cardiologist.
>>NOORY: Normally.
>>ZITTER: It's part of medicine.
It's part of treating a patient.
But the way American health
care has gone is we've become
so super-specialized and
so focused in on the stuff
that's, honestly, easier--
which is adding one more
thing, trying one more thing--
instead of confronting
reality of death
and dying, confronting the
angst of life ending, that we've
had to create a
subspecialty in order
to do the stuff that really
should have been done anyways
in medicine.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
In 2015, there was
a TED conference.
And a Dr. BJ Miller--
>>ZITTER: Yeah, Miller, yeah.
>>NOORY: You know him?
>>ZITTER: Oh, yeah, very well.
>>NOORY: A palliative care
doctor was there speaking.
Let's take a look.
>>BJ MILLER: Now, the
American health care system
has more than its fair
share of dysfunction
to match its
brilliance, to be sure.
I'm a physician, now, a hospice
and palliative medicine doc,
so I've seen care
from both sides.
And believe me, most everyone
who goes into health care
really means well--
I mean, truly.
But we who work in it
are also unwitting agents
for a system that too
often does not serve.
Why?
Well, there's actually a pretty
easy answer to that question,
and it explains a lot.
Because health care was designed
with diseases, not people,
at its center, which
is to say, of course,
it was badly designed.
And nowhere are the effects of
bad design more heartbreaking,
or the opportunity
for good design
more compelling, than at the
end of life, where things are
so distilled and concentrated.
There's no do-overs.
My purpose today is to
reach out across disciplines
and invite design thinking
into this big conversation--
that is, to bring
intention and creativity
to the experience of dying.
We have a monumental
opportunity in front of us
before a universal-- one of
the few universal-- issues,
as individuals, as well
as a civil society,
to rethink and redesign
how it is we die.
>>NOORY: I wonder, doctor,
if his losing his limbs--
his legs-- had anything to do
with his change in attitude
as a doctor.
>>ZITTER: Well,
the thing about BJ
is that he lost them
before he became a doctor.
So he had the
incredible privilege,
in a way, of coming
into medicine having
witnessed the other side.
>>NOORY: What happened to him?
Do we know?
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
He had a situation where he
was joking around in college
and got hurt while
playing around with some--
>>NOORY: A silly,
reckless thing.
>>ZITTER: Silly,
reckless thing, yeah.
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Now, when you're
working with a patient,
the goal is to save
the patient, obviously.
How many of them who come down
with diseases and illnesses
do you think will be dead
within a couple years?
>>ZITTER: Well,
it really depends
on what the collection of
people you're talking about is.
If you're in an intensive
care unit, for example,
you can imagine that the
way this system works--
I talk in my book
about something
called an end-of-life conveyor
belt, that because we're not
talking, because
we're not thinking
about the person and their
preferences earlier on,
we just keep kicking the can
down the road and saying,
well, we can try this,
and we can try that,
even as the patient
continues to deteriorate
and, ultimately,
continues to die.
We don't acknowledge that.
We don't talk about it.
We just keep doing
things to people.
If you're talking about
an ICU population,
the fact that we have this
end-of-life conveyor belt,
the sickest people, the patients
who are closest to dying,
are ending up like a sieve
in the intensive care unit.
So of that population
of patients
who come into an intensive
care unit with serious illness,
many of them are dying.
Many of them are at the end.
And they had no idea.
That's one of the
things that's most
baffling and shocking to me
is how few people who I know,
and who most of
the doctors know,
are clearly dying have no
idea that they're dying.
>>NOORY: Well, does
the palliative care--
is its goal to make that person
comfortable before they die?
Or what is that?
>>ZITTER: Well,
again, palliative care
isn't only geared towards
patients who are dying.
It's geared towards anybody
who has unmitigated suffering.
It could be someone who has
many years left to live.
The subset of patients
who are actually
dying who need
palliative care may
be people who are
appropriate for hospice.
But that's a small subset of
the whole potential offering.
>>NOORY: Huh.
Well, I would think the
medical community was always
treating people well, at
any point in this illness.
You're saying
that's not the case.
>>ZITTER: That to me, it seems
so logical that that's true,
that every doctor would
have as their goal
to treat and to be
honest and to be
forthright with people
all through every stage
of their illness.
And the sad and honest truth
is that that's not true.
We are not communicating.
We are not telling people.
There's a lack of
information transfer.
It's really heartbreaking.
>>NOORY: Whose fault is that?
>>ZITTER: It's very complicated.
It's no one person.
It's a system.
It's a culture.
Not only are doctors
not incentivized to tell
the truth--
because, frankly,
it doesn't pay.
What pays is to keep treating,
is to do that next procedure.
We're also not
given enough time--
>>NOORY: Do that operation.
>>ZITTER: Do that operation.
>>NOORY: Get it done.
>>ZITTER: And it's not only
that it pays financially,
but it also pays emotionally.
You feel like a
better doctor if you
have something else
to offer, if you
have some other way of saying,
we're going to beat this.
That's what success
feels like, as a doctor.
But I want to say there's
also responsibility
on the sides of
patients and families.
A lot of people come to doctors
with unrealistic expectations
of what they can get, this
fantasy of perpetual life
that exists in our culture.
Look at "Gray's Anatomy."
>>NOORY: This doctor's
going to cure me.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I'll be saved.
>>ZITTER: You guys should
be doing something else.
And why aren't you trying this?
And by the way,
there's data upon data
that shows that patients
don't like doctors
as much who give bad news
as they do like doctors
who give good news.
And so the fact is if you're
going in just expecting
from your doctor only
good news, you're
probably going to get it.
>>NOORY: Well, I know
people who will not
go to the doctor, Jessica,
because they don't
want to hear the bad news.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And I
say, wait a minute.
You want to hear
any kind of news
because you want to
make yourself better.
Don't be afraid to get bad news.
Welcome it, and then attack it.
>>ZITTER: Well, you don't only
want to make yourself better.
But what about if you have a
serious, life-limiting illness,
and you're actually dying?
You also want that news so that
you're not pursuing fantasy
treatments that could
get you in trouble,
like this end-of-life conveyor
belt where, just to tell you,
there's an epidemic of
people dying on machines with
their arms tied down to the
bed with a tube in their mouth,
and they cannot talk to you.
We have a huge number--
in fact, the data, recent,
showed hundreds of
thousands of patients
right now in the
United States who
are lying in beds in
long-term acute care
facilities attached
to breathing machines,
attached to machines, feeding
tubes, with their arms tied
down to their bed, who will
never come off of those.
That's a public health crisis.
>>NOORY: I don't want
to live that way.
>>ZITTER: Lots of people don't.
Most people don't.
>>NOORY: That's where
Kevorkian comes in.
And his assisted suicide
probably made sense.
>>ZITTER: But you don't even
need to go to that route.
You don't need assisted
suicide to live well
until the very end.
You need to not--
>>NOORY: Well, how could you--
OK, look, let me be the
devil's advocate for a moment.
I hate using that word,
the devil, when you're
talking about things like this.
But how could you
have a comfortable way
out when you're strapped
in, a tube down your mouth,
another one up here,
and you're like that?
>>ZITTER: You don't need
to have those tubes.
>>NOORY: How can you be
comfortable like that?
>>ZITTER: Because those
tubes never should
have been put in, probably.
>>NOORY: Well, then, if you
pull them out, what happens?
>>ZITTER: People will die.
But the fact is if we
know that someone's dying,
and we haven't given
them the chance
to opt out of having this
tube put into their mouth,
then we haven't done
our jobs as doctors.
>>NOORY: So what
you're saying, though,
is the odds are very
high that this patient is
going to die soon.
Let's make him die as
comfortable as possible.
>>ZITTER: Let's allow him to
have a natural death filled
with support and aggressive
treatment of any symptoms that
come up but not using things
that are going to make it
worse--
>>NOORY: Restrict him.
>>ZITTER: --and restrict him--
if that's what someone wants.
Some people-- a very small
minority because I talk
to people about
this all the time--
some people would
say, I don't care.
Do everything.
I don't care if I'm
living on a machine.
I don't care if I can never
talk to my loved ones again.
I don't care if I have
to live in a facility.
Keep my heart beating
for every nanosecond.
But that's a tiny minority
of people who would say that.
>>NOORY: Oh, no.
Pull the plug on me.
I don't want to live that way.
>>ZITTER: Or don't put
it in the first place
so that there's a plug to pull.
If you're dying, do you really
want your body propped up
on machinery?
Probably not.
And that's a decision
that should have
been made before it happens.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Where is society today, in
terms of talking about death
and just going through
that kind of scenario?
Is it very forthright or not?
>>ZITTER: Not-- not.
>>NOORY: You're afraid of it?
>>ZITTER: So many reasons.
I think most people
are afraid about death.
I think we're a
death-phobic society.
Look, if you go back
to ancient Greek myths,
there's myths about
living forever.
The myth of Eos and
Tithonus is a famous one.
People want to live
forever-- this Fountain
of Youth, miracle pills.
>>NOORY: Well, you
can if you believe
in the afterlife, technically.
>>ZITTER: True.
>>NOORY: You may not
be in a physical body,
but you may continue.
>>ZITTER: Right.
But what we are doing
here on this life
is we're using all of
these technologies,
and we're just sort of trying
to keep this life going forever.
And it's causing
immeasurable suffering.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Can it change?
>>ZITTER: Yes.
>>NOORY: How many doctors
are like you that do this?
>>ZITTER: It's
starting to change--
much too slowly.
Because even when you
get people to cognitively
agree and to learn
skills of communication
and to see a different way, when
the emotion of serious illness
is happening, people
tend to revert back
to what we are most comfortable
with, which is just to say,
well, let's do this, and let's
do that, and let's do this.
So we're starting to change.
We're starting to teach
our medical students
and our nursing students about
a different way to communicate,
about how to communicate,
valuing communication
and decision-making
that's difficult.
But we're not nearly
where we need to be.
And by the way, it's not just
the health care community
that needs to change and
develop these skills.
It's the community at large
that needs to start saying,
wait a minute.
I do want the truth
from my doctors.
I do want to do decision-making
in advance of me becoming
so sick and so desperate.
I want to make the
decisions about how I want
to live earlier on upstream.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Is the care also for the living
who know the dying person?
Because they go through grief.
And it's not easy
on them, either.
>>ZITTER: Oh, yes.
>>NOORY: You know what?
My father died pretty darn fast.
He was 88 years old.
That's a pretty darn good run.
>>ZITTER: Oh, yeah.
>>NOORY: My sister died in her
early 50s of a brain tumor.
That wasn't a good run.
>>ZITTER: Oh, terrible.
>>NOORY: So you have
two different deaths.
One was a little easier for me
to accept than the other one.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And how many people
have to go through that?
>>ZITTER: Well, interesting
you bring this up.
We have a movie that we're
just about to release
that's in post-production now
about a woman in my community
who was dying.
And she was doing
everything right.
It was all just so beautiful.
We called in hospice.
We got all the attention
to support her.
She had a very, very
supportive religious community.
Her sons came and flew from
overseas with their guitars.
And there was-- it was
doing everything right.
And the reason I initially
wanted to make this film
was to show how death
can be beautiful.
And you can make
a beautiful death.
What happens in the course of
this film, as you watch it,
is that she goes on to have
a very, very difficult death
with all the right
things in place.
>>NOORY: You mean physically?
>>ZITTER: Physically and
financially and emotionally.
It was just very exhausting
and very difficult.
And her husband-- it
was very tough on them.
And so this film has
become, actually,
not about a beautiful death
but about caregiver burden
and the burden on those
around the dying patient.
>>NOORY: Oh, it's huge.
>>ZITTER: And we don't even
think about that as a society
or figure out how to
support those caregivers.
But the worst thing, besides the
physical suffering and watching
that, the worst thing
that caregivers or loved
ones experience is when
their loved one is dying
a death that they
don't think they
would have wanted-- for
example, on machines.
But they don't feel comfortable
saying, you know what?
It's time to
release the machine.
It's time to take
away the machine.
Because that feels
so overwhelmingly--
such a huge responsibility.
And most people should never
be put in that position.
That conversation should have
been had many, many years
earlier to figure out, I know
what my father would want.
He wouldn't want to
be on this machine.
>>NOORY: Sudden
death is tougher than
a long-term, expected death.
Because when it's sudden--
and I've gone through that, too.
I had a friend of mine who died
of an overdose of prescription
pills.
Nobody expected that to happen.
Those kind are really difficult.
Because as the living,
you go through these stages
of why did this happen?
You get angry.
You question things.
The sudden ones are rough.
You get a call from
the police and say
your son got killed
in a car accident.
You don't expect those.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
Yes, and I can also tell
you that long ones can
be really tough, too.
So much of it depends on
whether or not the way it goes
is consistent with what's
important to that person.
>>NOORY: It's almost
like torture but longer.
>>ZITTER: It can
be like torture.
It can be.
I've seen it many, many times.
And that's why good preparations
and honesty can mitigate that
and make it much better.
>>NOORY: You have
talked about four things
we can do to prepare for dying.
>>ZITTER: I'm a physician who
really loves to save life.
But I also have come to learn
about the beauty of having
a good death.
A good death is really personal.
Each person has their own
preferences and values.
And if we can match
those as they're dying,
that is a good death.
So in order to
achieve a good death,
I think there are several
steps that people can take.
The first is you
need to acknowledge
that we're going to all die.
The second is to
prepare for that day.
Third, you really need
to be able to communicate
those preferences and
values to your loved ones
and to your health care team.
Because everyone
needs to know what
they are in order to enable
you to have your life
that you want all the
way up until the end.
Lastly, I think it's
really, really important
that we have a much more
collaborative approach
to managing patients
at the end of life.
Because while the doctor might
be the expert in the disease,
the patient is really the
expert in the patient.
I really-- I just am
just so happy that--
>>NOORY: So looking at
those patients, doctor,
are they in the hospital
to die, or are they
in the hospital thinking
they're going to get cured?
>>ZITTER: It's a good question.
A lot of them think
not necessarily
that they're going to get cured
but that we're going to just
be able to keep them
going and going and going,
which may not mean cure but
just keep them going and going.
Both of those
patients were dying.
>>NOORY: Sadly.
>>ZITTER: Sadly.
>>NOORY: Different ages, too.
>>ZITTER: Yes.
She was very young.
>>NOORY: The woman
was very young.
>>ZITTER: Very young, yeah.
>>NOORY: Why did they
need to be in the hospital
in the first place?
Why can't they do this at home?
>>ZITTER: They can.
We can, actually, manage
patients at home who are dying.
And that's what hospice is.
The fact is these
patients both came in
because they were suffering
with physical symptoms,
and they didn't have any support
in the home to manage it.
So they came into the hospital.
Both of those patients ended
up going home on hospice
once we were able to
clarify with them,
and they understood
that they were dying
and that we wanted to make
whatever time we had left
the best that it
could be-- allow them
to be home with their families,
and allow them to feel
as comfortable as possible.
>>NOORY: What about the young
lady's husband, for example,
who was sitting next to her?
What was he going through?
>>ZITTER: Oh, it
was heartbreaking--
heartbreaking heartbreaking.
>>NOORY: Horrible.
>>ZITTER: He was an amazing man,
an amazing, supportive husband.
He just wanted to care for her.
He knew she was dying.
But they just weren't
talking about it.
They weren't accepting it.
>>NOORY: How old was she?
>>ZITTER: She was-- oh,
I'm trying to remember.
>>NOORY: 30s?
>>ZITTER: No, she was
probably in her late 20s.
>>NOORY: Oh, my god.
>>ZITTER: And what happened was
when we started to talk with
them about the real
fact of her dying,
which no one had talked about--
she'd been sick for years with
this illness--
it was a relief for them.
Because the fact is when
people are this sick,
they know, and
their families know,
that things are
really not right.
But when no one's
wanting to admit it,
there's this tension and
this sort of dancing around
the truth that is exhausting.
And when you can actually bring
in the truth to an encounter,
there is a tremendous
amount of relief
and then positive planning for,
OK, so how do we go forward?
>>NOORY: And what about the
older gentleman with his older
wife that was there?
Does she expect him to die?
And is that a different
kind of approach?
>>ZITTER: Again, same story.
That family, also, no one
was really actively talking
about death or not death.
They were just going
from symptom to symptom
and wanting something from us
to keep the symptoms at bay
and to keep him going
as long as possible.
And those goals are all things
that can be achieved better
with hospice.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
If I needed to be in the
hospital for an operation,
that's where I'd go.
>>ZITTER: Exactly.
>>NOORY: They do a
great job for that.
>>ZITTER: Right, exactly.
>>NOORY: But if I
don't need that,
I want to do everything at home.
>>ZITTER: Most people do--
not everybody, but
most people do.
And the fact is we're not
giving people those options.
Because we're not
telling them the truth.
We're not addressing and facing
the truth earlier and upstage.
>>NOORY: What about the
overprescribing of medicine
and prescription drugs?
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: That's a problem, too.
>>ZITTER: It is.
It's a big problem.
And it's a big part of
what's fueling this problem.
For example, there are always,
as you know, new things coming
up in our health
care system that are
the new promise and the new--
>>NOORY: The new technology,
the new something.
>>ZITTER: The new
type of chemotherapy
that's not going
to make you sick,
but it's going to save you.
The fact is that's exciting.
That's one of the beautiful
promises of American medicine.
But the reality is those
saves, those miracle cures,
only work for a small
number of people.
And frankly, they don't
necessarily cure the disease.
They may give you an
extra three months.
They may give you an extra
year, maybe an extra two years.
But everyone thinks when
there's this small outlier
option available that
they're going to be the one
to benefit from it--
again, that
unrealistic thinking,
that false-hope-based thinking.
I'm not saying that there
aren't things that can
be wonderful that can happen.
But people are so wanting that
to be-- and the doctors, too--
we're so wanting to
live with that belief
that this cure can work for you
that we don't actually, again,
address the reality
on the ground
and say, OK, this
is probably not
going to necessarily work the
way we're all hoping it will.
So what are we going to do when
that happens and make a plan?
>>NOORY: What would you say,
Jessica, in your experience--
and you've been doing
this for how long
now, the palliative care?
>>ZITTER: Many years-- well,
palliative care since 2008.
>>NOORY: OK.
What would you say would be
one of your happier moments
doing this as a doctor?
Can you give us a case?
>>ZITTER: Oh, so many--
so many.
One of the cases is actually
the epilogue in my book.
The name I use is Marcia Green,
but the woman's real name
was Stephanie Rovid.
And she was a woman
who I actually cared
for in the intensive care unit.
She came in.
She had cancer.
She'd had it for many years.
But she was going to fight it.
And she kept saying
to her oncologist,
give me everything you've got.
And as these chemotherapies
kept not really working,
and the cancer kept advancing,
she kept saying, give me more.
Give me another one.
And the way we
work in medicine is
we say, well, she wants more, so
we give it to them, even if we
don't think it's going to help.
So she kept getting one
course of chemotherapy
after another after another.
And she was getting sicker and
sicker and sicker and sicker.
By the time I met her,
I was her ICU doctor
because she was in shock.
She had no blood pressure.
She was dying.
>>NOORY: Oh, my god.
>>ZITTER: And so she came
in, and we resuscitated her.
We were lucky.
Most of the time, by the
time someone's in shock,
we can't save them.
But we resuscitated her.
We got her back up, sort
of like pumping up a tire.
But this was a leaky tire.
It was just going to--
>>NOORY: It was going
to deflate again.
>>ZITTER: --deflate again.
But my initial
thing was, OK, good.
We got this job done.
Let's send her to the floor.
But then I realized,
if I don't talk
to this woman about the fact
that this isn't working,
my colleagues out
on the floors aren't
going to talk to her
about that, either.
And I need to talk
to her about it.
And so I went into her room
to talk to her about it.
It was one of the
scariest things
I did because her
family had taped up
a huge sign in her room
that said, "no bad news."
And I knew they didn't
want to hear any bad news.
>>NOORY: They thought
that was a motivator.
That's probably what
they did that for.
>>ZITTER: They thought
it was going to give them
energy to keep going.
And I sat down on
the side of the bed,
and I told them the truth.
It was very hard.
It was very painful.
They got very angry at me.
They threw me out of the room.
And a couple days later,
I went to check on them.
They were up on the
floor at this point.
And it turned out that they had
actually heard what I had said.
Even though they kicked
me out of the room,
and they yelled at
me, and they told me
I was a terrible doctor--
>>NOORY: They listened.
>>ZITTER: --they listened.
And she ended up
going home on hospice
and not doing any
more chemotherapy.
In fact, my husband said,
she chose Cabernet--
because she was a big wine
enthusiast-- over chemo,
went home and had two months
of a beautiful, beautiful,
beautiful chunk of her life.
And then, she died in her home
with her grandchildren around.
And it was beautiful.
And I feel really,
really good about that.
But I have many,
many more examples
like that that I can tell you.
>>NOORY: It's too bad that
we can't cure these diseases.
>>ZITTER: Oh, well.
>>NOORY: It's too bad.
Maybe one day--
>>ZITTER: Maybe one day.
>>NOORY: --technology will
be able to do that, too.
>>ZITTER: Yeah, yeah.
>>NOORY: It's bizarre
how cells go rampant
and change everything else.
>>ZITTER: They do.
>>NOORY: A lot of sick
people out there, Jessica.
>>ZITTER: Well, yeah.
It's true.
And currently, death
basically has 100% prevalence.
Everybody dies.
So whether we can push
it off a little bit,
it's going to
happen to all of us.
>>NOORY: Tell us the premise of
your book, "Extreme Measures."
>>ZITTER: "Extreme
Measures" is really--
it's both a memoir
showing my movement
from one philosophy of care to
another and all the patients
and colleagues and
experiences I've
had along the way, the
difficulty of moving
into this new
approach and how it
rubs against the
current medical culture
and causes conflict, but
also the beauty of it
and how we can have some
really amazing experiences,
like Stephanie Rovid,
like I just explained.
And it's really a call
to action for not only
our medical culture to change
the way we're thinking of,
as BJ Miller put it, not just
about focusing on the disease
but focusing on the person.
BJ wrote the main
blurb for my book.
The call to action is to focus
on the person, not the disease.
And that's what it is.
>>NOORY: Has this made
you a better doctor?
>>ZITTER: I would
say yes, for sure.
>>NOORY: They don't teach
you this in medical school.
>>ZITTER: No, not yet.
>>NOORY: They should.
>>ZITTER: They should.
>>NOORY: They should
have a course.
>>ZITTER: They should.
We're working on it.
But it's going to
take a lot of changing
in the way we think about how
to teach medical students.
>>NOORY: Well, is it because
doctors don't understand,
or they're just
not caring enough?
What's lacking?
>>ZITTER: What's lacking
is several things.
What's lacking is
the tools to know
how to do communication well.
Because communication is
not just a natural thing.
Breaking bad news
is really hard.
Standing strong in the face
of onslaught of emotion
from your patients,
it's very hard.
You need to be trained to do it.
It takes lots of
hours of practice--
repeating, repeating, repeating.
That is one thing
that's got to be
put into place is really firm
training and communication
skills.
Number two, the infrastructure
has got to change.
Right now, you can't expect to
see seven patients in clinic
in an afternoon-- in
a pulmonary clinic--
and actually talk
to those patients--
>>NOORY: Each one of them.
>>ZITTER: --about
end-of-life planning.
Because a lot of those
patients are coming in
with end-stage COPD or end-stage
lung diseases or heart diseases
or kidney diseases.
And no one's talking
to them about what
their preferences are.
They should be having
these conversations
before they hit the intensive
care unit, before they've
gotten intubated.
Because a lot of these
patients would never
want to be intubated if they
understood what it meant.
>>NOORY: The host of my
radio show years ago,
who was the founder,
died a year ago.
And he had severe COPD--
severe.
And the coroner
said it was death
by an overdose of
prescription pills.
That's how they left it.
It must be very
difficult for somebody
who is at that stage in life to
keep pushing and carrying on,
not being able to
breathe on your own.
It's got to be horrible.
>>ZITTER: Yes.
But here's the thing.
For example, those
of us who have
been trained in
managing symptoms,
and really addressing
and managing symptoms--
like shortness of breath, for
example, anxiety, itching,
GI distress, all the things
that can come with end-stage
illness--
we have more than
a 90% success rate
of getting those kinds of
symptoms under control.
The problem is very few
patients have access
to the kinds of expertise
that we in palliative care
or hospice can bring.
And so they're suffering without
good, aggressive treatment
of those symptoms.
>>NOORY: All right.
Let's look at a video explaining
the kind of work you do.
>>ZITTER: Sure.
[MUSIC PLAYING ON VIDEO]
>>ZITTER: My name
is Jessica Zitter,
and I am a physician who
practices both intensive care
medicine and palliative
care medicine.
So palliative care is
an approach to medicine
that really looks
at the whole patient
and tries to account for
all of the patient's needs,
not just the needs of
individual organ systems.
"Extreme Measures" started out
as a collection of writings
from my early career,
when I was really
suffering in the intensive care
unit with no other paradigm
and watching a lot of
suffering of my patients.
I do believe that there is a
public health crisis right now
with people dying badly.
And I feel like I have
a front row seat to it
in the intensive care unit.
So many people
come there on what
I call the end-of-life
conveyor belt.
And they end up
attached to machines
and unable to live
independently.
The book really became
more of a vision of how
we can do things differently.
It is scary to talk about death.
It's scary to think about death.
I spend a lot of time
talking to my family
about death and
preferences and values.
And it gets a little bit
less scary each time.
And it's really
brought us closer.
>>PATIENT: I want
to go peacefully.
>>ZITTER: I'm a physician who
really loves to save life.
But I also have come to learn
about the beauty of having
a good death.
A good death is really personal.
Each person has their own
preferences and values.
And if we can match
those as they're dying,
that is a good death.
>>NOORY: And we'll talk about
how people can get your book.
>>ZITTER: Great.
>>NOORY: Sad, though, isn't it?
>>ZITTER: Sad but also
kind of beautiful.
Because again, let's accept it.
Let's remember everyone dies--
everyone.
>>NOORY: It's true.
>>ZITTER: So how
do we want to die?
How do we want to live
until the very end?
And I think that can
be really beautiful
when we can achieve that.
>>NOORY: The end-of-life
conveyor belt theory
that you talk about, explain
that a little bit more.
>>ZITTER: It's this automatic
default without conversation,
attachment of new machines
and tubes and treatments
to a person.
>>NOORY: It's very
cold, isn't it?
>>ZITTER: It's
very cold, sterile.
It's completely depersonalized.
It's just a protocol.
And it isn't in any way based
on a person, on their prognosis,
on their preferences,
on how they want to go.
>>NOORY: Is it because,
Jessica, the medical community
thinks for a moment they're
going to cure that person?
So we're going to put
them in this situation.
We're going to put
tubes down their throat.
We're going to inject
them every day.
We're going to just do all
these horrendous things
to try to save them because
maybe just one person is going
to be able to walk out of here.
Do they think that?
>>ZITTER: I think
that it's complicated.
Let's just take the
subset of patients
that we actually know are dying,
and we're still doing that,
too.
Because if you took a blind
poll, an anonymous poll,
and asked the doctors caring
for a whole group of patients
who are dying, do
you think this person
has any chance of getting out
of the intensive care unit
or of ever getting
out of the hospital?
you would see that a huge
number of the patients who
we are putting on the
end-of-life conveyor
belt every doctor thinks
is not going to survive.
>>NOORY: I would say, yeah.
>>ZITTER: So why
are we doing that?
>>NOORY: Nine out
of 10, probably.
>>ZITTER: Why are we doing that?
Well, I'll tell you
why we're doing that.
It's not because we think
they're going to go home.
Because I just said, these are
patients that we don't think--
>>NOORY: Is it money?
>>ZITTER: It's a
combination of, I
think, probably most
important, it's easier.
It's easier to just keep
doing things to people
than it is to talk to people
about difficult stuff.
>>NOORY: Well, sadly,
it's also profitable.
>>ZITTER: And it is profitable.
>>NOORY: How much does it cost
to have those people in those
hospital rooms to die if they
last a month or two months
or three months--
>>ZITTER: 100%
>>NOORY: --than
if they went home?
>>ZITTER: Yes.
So agree with you.
Profit is a huge motive.
And it's a really
sad and scary reality
in this country, how the
profit motive impacts
the way we care for patients.
But then, I would say one of
the most important things,
which I talked about
before, is the sense
of how it feels as a doctor.
What makes you feel
like a success?
Do you feel successful
when you just
come in with a packet of
some new catheter to instill,
and you get it done, and
then you clean up the mess?
Does that make you
feel successful?
Or does telling
someone that you think
they're dying and having them
throw you out of the room
make you feel successful?
I would venture to
say it's a lot easier,
and it makes you feel--
at least in the moment-- a lot
more successful as a doctor
to have put your catheter
in and cleaned up and tidied
up and walked on to
the next patient.
>>NOORY: Does your mindset
change if the patient is
a little child, and maybe by
putting them on all these types
of medicines and things
like that in the hospital--
though it's a
horrible little way
for a little person to live--
could cure them at that age?
>>ZITTER: That's an
excellent question.
And I'm not a pediatrician.
I don't take care
of little people.
But I will say one thing.
I take care of 20-year-olds.
I take care of 30-year-olds.
I take care of 80-year-olds.
And even young people die.
And plenty of young people die.
And plenty of my
patients who are
young and in their 30s with four
kids and who are nice people
die.
And if I can't accept
that, that they're dying,
when I physiologically
realize that they are,
then I am doing
them a disservice.
Because again, whether
you're a pediatrician
and it's a baby or
a child, or you're
talking about an
80-year-old person,
if someone is
actually dying, you
need to be able to be
realistic and honest
and plan accordingly
and not just
do things based on false hope.
>>NOORY: What is the
mindset to change the way
people in the health
community approach this?
How do you get them--
>>ZITTER: Good question.
>>NOORY: --to change
their attitudes
and the way they do things?
>>ZITTER: I think a lot
of it's about culture.
And when I just spoke about how
we think of success as saving
people, or we think
of success as being
able to do a good procedure,
regardless of the outcome,
we need to change our
idea of what makes success
to be focused on what's
successful for the patient--
patient-focused outcomes.
We need to think about
quality of life more.
We need to think about a good
death as being successful,
compared to a death on machines.
>>NOORY: Correct.
>>ZITTER: We need
to be able to change
what the definition of being a
good doctor, a valuable doctor,
is.
Right now, the people who
are most valued in medicine
are the people who do
the procedures, who
make the money at doing
those intensive procedures.
Why aren't we valuing
doctors who communicate?
Why aren't we valuing doctors
who focus on the family system?
We're not valuing that at all.
So we've got to change
that culture of what
is considered success.
That's one of the first
things I think we need to do.
And that's going to
be a lot of work.
>>NOORY: That is a
lot of work, isn't it?
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And like
we were saying,
the medical schools need
to start training people
in their young 20s, when
they're in school, to understand
this a little bit more.
>>ZITTER: Yeah,
definitely, definitely.
>>NOORY: What do you think
about the health care community,
overall?
What would you
give it as a grade
in terms of curing people?
>>ZITTER: Well, there's so many
different things to grade them
on, right?
If you're grading
on curing people,
I think, oh, it's
a hard question.
>>NOORY: A C?
>>ZITTER: It just depends
on the subset of illness
and the medical problem
you're talking about.
I would say that the biggest
problem with our health
care in America is the system.
I think the people who come
into it care about patients.
I think, as BJ Miller
said, we're good people.
We're here because we
care, for the most part.
We're trying to do the
right thing by people.
But the system impedes
us from doing that.
We've got this
broken system which
is hyper-focused on
diseases, hyper-focused
on specialization.
We are not looking holistically
at our population of people
who come to us for help.
And so I think the system
is really, really broken.
I think it's,
actually, very broken.
I'd give it a C. I'd
give it a C. I think
we have some great technological
things that we're creating
and developing, and
for that, that's an A.
But that's a small
subset of people who
are going to benefit from that.
>>NOORY: Right, exactly.
>>ZITTER: Very small.
>>NOORY: Where is it in
the next 15 or 20 years?
How does it change?
>>ZITTER: There are
some things I think
that are going to get better.
And some things, I
think, might get worse.
What might get
better is, as I said,
we're starting to think about
training our trainees to focus
slightly on what is really
success, maybe to change
that definition, to focus
on communication skills
and the importance
of breaking bad news.
That's going to be
something that's positive.
I hope the field
of palliative care
will lead the way for all
the other subspecialties
to do what they should
be doing already, right?
The thing I worry
about getting worse
is with every new
development that comes out
in every little
commercial you see on CNN
in the break about
some new Spiriva
or some new COPD medication
or some new targeted
chemotherapy--
>>NOORY: But the disclaimers
are unbelievable.
>>ZITTER: Right.
>>NOORY: They're horrible.
>>ZITTER: But the
biggest problem
is that it fuels this fantasy
that we're going to cure death.
And there is this collusion
between all of us--
doctors and patients
and families alike--
that we somehow are
moving towards the idea
that we can cure death.
And I don't think that's
a realistic way for us
to be thinking as a society.
>>NOORY: Do you
know they actually
want to clone our bodies,
download our memories,
store them, and then put
them into the cloned body,
and it would be us forever?
And every time you
get to a certain age,
they clone your body again.
They raise it, and they download
the memory into this brain.
And I think, one day, they're
going to be able to do that,
technically.
And who are we but our memories
and our brains and our thought
patterns?
That's who we are.
We could occupy any
body, any physical body.
But if you still have
your memory intact,
that's who you are.
You may look at your
body and go, well,
I kind of like the
old one better.
But what happens when
they get to that point
where they can download
memory into a cloned body?
You'd literally live forever.
>>ZITTER: Well, if
it ever happens,
I'm not sure I'd
want it for myself.
But right now, we
are so far from that
that I want to focus on helping
the people who are here right
now, suffering from our
current system, which
is just causing a devastating
public health crisis.
>>NOORY: Do you
find that religion
gets in the way of any of this?
>>ZITTER: Hmm, that's
a good question.
Religion is a stand-in
for the human brain.
I would say that
religion can sometimes
be helpful for people,
and sometimes it
can get in the way
of them processing
towards a good death.
Sometimes people just say, I
don't want to talk about it.
I believe in miracles.
And that shuts down
the conversation.
And you can't have any kind
of a further conversation.
And sometimes people's
faith gives them
the courage to face this
important discussion.
And so I wouldn't
say that religion
makes it better or worse.
But I have seen it make
it both better and worse.
>>NOORY: There's
a Catholic priest
by the name of Gerald Coleman
who talks about end-of-life
with regards to the church.
>>GERALD COLEMAN:
End-of-life care,
in terms of Catholic teaching,
rests upon the dignity
and sanctity of human life
and that every person has
fundamental intrinsic
dignity because we
were created in God's image.
And therefore, when
a person is reaching
the end of his or her
life, we treat the person
always from that perspective.
They have human dignity.
And even though they may
be limited physically
or emotionally or whatever
the limitation might be,
we always treat the person
having human dignity.
And that's where the
church's long tradition,
that
proportionate/disproportionate
or ordinary/extraordinary
treatment,
comes into play,
that because we want
to respect the human
life of the individual,
certain treatments can
become extraordinary or
disproportionate.
And if we could demonstrate
that that is the case,
then the person has
no moral obligation
to pursue or undertake
that treatment because
of their human dignity.
And the question of
nutrition and hydration,
that's a very long,
complicated one.
But to put it very briefly is
that because of human dignity,
considering the person's
circumstance and illness,
we presume to give that person
medically-assisted nutrition
and hydration if it is
shown that helping with,
medically, nutrition
and hydration is
going to assist the
person's human dignity
and is not burdensome.
If it becomes
burdensome, then there's
no obligation to do
it in the first place,
or there is an obligation, or a
permission, to cease doing it.
>>NOORY: Sounds like
palliative care, doesn't it?
They're saying if it's not going
to prolong life in a good way,
don't do it.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
It's a huge thing that this
statement, which I believe
was reasonably over
the past few years,
that the pope said that tube
feeding was not a requirement.
It used to be that it was.
>>NOORY: Right.
Keep 'em alive.
>>ZITTER: Keep 'em alive.
It was a huge move for
the Catholic community.
What I think is really
important to understand
is that the data show that in
many, many kinds of conditions,
as life starts to ebb,
as people start to die,
as dementia takes its toll and
prevents you from swallowing
correctly-- which is one
of the things that happens
in dementia-- that giving
people feeding through tubes
can actually make
them die sooner
and cause tremendous suffering.
So we think of food as this
emotional thing, as caring.
It's a cultural thing for us.
We don't think of it as
a medical intervention.
But the fact is food is a
medical intervention, just
like any other type of
medical intervention.
And we need to not
force it on people
when it won't cause benefit.
>>NOORY: How involved
do the family members
get in these decisions, as well?
So when you're
talking to a patient
and he's got family members
around, do they get involved?
>>ZITTER: Absolutely.
First of all, in the
intensive care unit,
for example, patients
usually can't talk to you.
So you have to be talking
to their family members.
That is when the surrogate
decision-maker is, essentially,
the decision-maker standing
in for the patient.
And that's a real
problem in our society.
Because the fact
is most families
have not had an
honest conversation
about death and dying.
You saw me and my kids
and my husband sitting
around talking about,
well, I would want this,
and I would want that.
Most families haven't done that.
And so when you have a patient
all of a sudden not able
to talk to you, and there
was no advance conversations
with the family, and
then you're relying
on this surrogate decision-maker
to make all the decisions,
well, they're going to be
like, well, I don't know.
I never talked about it.
And they're going to err on
the side of prolonging life.
So what happens is
people then end up
getting trapped who may never
have wanted to be on machines.
Because their loved one,
well-intentioned, just
never felt comfortable and never
felt they had the permission
to say take that tube out.
That's why these conversations
must happen upstream.
>>NOORY: How many
people expect a miracle?
>>ZITTER: I don't know
that it's necessarily
a miracle in the sense
of God doing something
like raising Lazarus.
But I think a lot of people have
this hidden belief and fantasy
that the health care system--
hospitals, doctors--
is somehow going
to be able to pull something
out of their pocket
at the 11th hour to
just keep them going.
And that is a little bit of
fantasy thinking and miracle
thinking, and I would call
it, sometimes, false hope.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
had a circumstance,
or have you witnessed anything,
where you knew this person was
going to die and, all of
a sudden, they didn't?
>>ZITTER: Yes.
I'm so glad you brought that up.
I talk about that in my book.
It's a really
important phenomenon.
Very rarely has
that happened to me.
And I've actually pulled--
when I wrote my book, I
wanted to ask other ICU
doctors and other doctors if
they had had experiences where
they thought someone was
absolutely-- they were sure
that someone was going to
die, and they didn't, and how
did that impact them?
Well, first of all, again,
like me, very few people
had that experience.
>>NOORY: Right--
doesn't happen a lot.
>>ZITTER: It doesn't
happen that much.
And second of all,
when it happens,
it can impact your practice
for years in a bad way.
If you've had one
unexpected person do better
than you thought they
were going to do,
it can make you hesitant
to ever render--
>>NOORY: You mean as a doctor?
>>ZITTER: As a doctor.
>>NOORY: Really?
Gun-shy-- it makes you gun-shy?
>>ZITTER: Gun-shy
about giving bad news,
which puts people at
a real disadvantage
because they're functioning
without the information.
>>NOORY: That's interesting.
They go the opposite.
>>ZITTER: Yeah.
Yeah.
Can I give you an example?
>>NOORY: Sure, please.
>>ZITTER: And again, I
write about this in my book.
It was a young woman.
She was an IV drug user,
and she had endocarditis
because bacteria was going
through her blood that
had come in through her vein and
fastened onto her heart valve.
And she kept showering infection
all throughout her body.
She had pus in her brain
and all around her body.
>>NOORY: Oh, god.
>>ZITTER: It was terrible.
Sorry, I hope it's not too--
>>NOORY: That's all right.
It's graphic, but
it's important.
>>ZITTER: The fact is she was in
our ICU, completely in a coma,
for months and months.
And her brain looked
terrible on the MRI.
And she wasn't waking up.
And everyone really was
talking to her family about,
this is terrible.
We don't think she's
going to wake up.
We think she's never going to.
And her mother said,
I believe in miracles.
Just keep doing this.
And the fact is that she
ended up, shockingly,
waking up about eight
months, nine months later--
to everyone's shock,
completely unexpected.
>>NOORY: It happens.
>>ZITTER: It happens, but
rare-- rare, rare, rare.
>>NOORY: Very rare.
>>ZITTER: And that case
impacted our hospital culture
for years afterwards, made us,
oh, well, remember that patient
in bed five in the ICU?
She woke up.
>>NOORY: It could happen again.
>>ZITTER: So any
time we'd say, well,
let's try to tell this
family we don't think
things are going to go well.
Well, remember that patient?
So the fact is she was
such an outlier case,
it was so unexpected--
and actually,
infections, if you're
going to have any type
of medical problem
that could reverse, it
would be an infection.
But if she had had a big tumor,
or if she had had a big bleed--
>>NOORY: Right.
That's going to get her.
>>ZITTER: Probably, yeah.
But the fact is it impacted
our hospital culture for years.
And it's important to remember
that these are really, really
outlier cases,
and they shouldn't
make us not willing to give
bad news to other families.
>>NOORY: Have you ever witnessed
anything angelic or anything
really supernatural at the
moment of death or anything
like that?
>>ZITTER: Yeah, well,
it's interesting.
The most angelic
experiences I've seen--
and I've seen lots of them--
have to do with
families coming together
and reconciliation and peace in
someone who hasn't had peace,
some kind of a sense
of peace coming
into the room over the day
or the week before a person
died, family members
coming who hadn't
talked to them for years.
To me, that's a sort of a
miraculous, beautiful thing
that I've seen.
I've seen the miracle
of human resilience,
somebody who you just think
they couldn't take another piece
of bad news-- they couldn't.
And they do, and they process
it in a way that's productive.
So I wouldn't say that I've seen
auras or things moving in ways
that you wouldn't expect.
But I've seen
beautiful experiences
that you wouldn't have expected,
psychologically and spiritually
and socially, happen
that you weren't
expecting that are beautiful.
>>NOORY: When a person dies,
doctor, the moment they die,
is it the heart that just
stops that kills them?
>>ZITTER: It depends.
There's so many different
ways for a person to die.
But usually, the heart
is the final thing to go.
The breathing usually is the
second to last thing to go.
And then, the person maybe
will take one breath every 10
seconds or every 20 seconds--
>>NOORY: Are they in discomfort?
>>ZITTER: No.
A lot of times patients
are-- it depends, right?
It depends.
If we're involved as a
palliative care community,
and we're on the case, and we're
really managing their symptoms,
people can be very,
very, very peaceful.
>>NOORY: I always thought
the best way to die
is in your sleep.
>>ZITTER: I do, too.
>>NOORY: If you're going
to die, the best way to die
is in your sleep.
>>ZITTER: I would agree.
>>NOORY: And if there
is an afterlife--
I'm going to ask you that
question in a second--
they'll know they're dead.
If there isn't,
who cares, right?
>>ZITTER: Right.
Right.
Right, exactly.
I would have to agree with you.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
I would look at a doctor
as more of a scientist who
has a different perspective
on life and death.
I'm going to guess
that your belief
system of life after death is
probably still on the fence.
>>ZITTER: I think, for me,
as with so many other pieces
of understanding life and the
world around me, I feel humble.
I don't think I know.
I don't feel any confidence that
I know if there's an afterlife
or not.
>>NOORY: You could be right.
You could be wrong, right?
>>ZITTER: I just think, yeah,
there's some things that
are unknowable.
And I hope that
it's all beautiful,
that there is an
afterlife, and that it's
a beautiful afterlife, and
that people live beautifully
forever.
I just don't know.
But what I want to do is make
life here on Earth as good
as I can make it for everybody.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
There was a doctor who walked
up to his patient and said,
I've got some bad news for you.
You've got two months to live.
Here's your bill.
And the guy looks at
the bill and goes,
oh, my god, doc, two months?
And I can't afford to
pay this right now.
He said, well, you've got
eight more months to live.
>>ZITTER: [GASPS]
>>NOORY: It's a
doctor joke-story.
>>ZITTER: Right.
>>NOORY: They love
it at conventions.
>>ZITTER: Right,
right, right, right.
>>NOORY: But there's
some truth to that.
The medical community prolongs
life when maybe it shouldn't.
>>ZITTER: Right.
Yes, number one.
And number two, we
don't know how much time
you have left to live.
That's the other lesson
to take out of that joke.
We don't really know if it's two
months or if it's eight months
or if it's three years.
So we can give you
information based
on what our general
experience tells us.
But we don't actually know.
And so I think what we have to
do, again, it's about humility
and saying, we think this is
how much time you have left.
But ultimately,
it's in God's hands,
or it's in the universe's hands.
And let's just try to
make whatever time it
is as good as it can be.
>>NOORY: You mentioned God.
Are you a believer?
>>ZITTER: I am.
But I also, again, I will admit
that I'm very humble about it.
>>NOORY: You're not sure.
>>ZITTER: I don't really know.
>>NOORY: If you walked through
a hospital today, Jessica,
and saw all these patients
with tubes in their mouth,
what would you do?
What would you do?
>>ZITTER: I do it every day.
>>NOORY: You don't
pull them out.
>>ZITTER: Oh, no.
And I wouldn't want to because
some tubes help people.
I have saved many lives
with intensive care.
>>NOORY: But is this a judgment
decision by the doctor?
Who makes the call?
>>ZITTER: About
pulling a tube out?
>>NOORY: About
pulling the tube out--
>>ZITTER: Hopefully,
the patient.
>>NOORY: --about
putting them in.
>>ZITTER: Hopefully the patient.
Ideally, it's the patient's
informed decision.
>>NOORY: If I had all
these tubes in me,
and you come by, and
I went, take them out,
even though you thought--
you thought-- it's
better if they're in me,
would you take them out?
>>ZITTER: Well, first
of all, you probably
wouldn't be able to say
take them out to me.
Because when you have a tube
in your mouth, you can't talk.
>>NOORY: Oh, let's say,
(MUMBLING) take them out.
>>ZITTER: But don't forget--
yes, and that happens a lot.
>>NOORY: But would you?
>>ZITTER: I would.
But we would make
sure, and we would
have lots of conversations, and
we would bring the family in,
and we would try
to get a consensus.
>>NOORY: Yeah, but it's
the patient's decision.
>>ZITTER: It is the
patient's decision.
If a person has capacity,
has mental capacity,
and they don't want you
to do something to them,
or they want you
to remove something
from them, that is their right.
We do not have a
right to override
a patient's preferences.
>>NOORY: I wish most doctors
would think that way.
>>ZITTER: Yeah, well.
I think it's ultimately
got to be about a person.
>>NOORY: Where do people get
your book, "Extreme Measures"?
>>ZITTER: Anywhere--
Amazon, my website.
>>NOORY: Which is?
>>ZITTER: JessicaZitter.com
>>NOORY: Z-I-T-T-E-R?
>>ZITTER: Yes.
>>NOORY: OK.
Well, good luck doing
what you're doing.
And it is a tough row
to hoe to get up there.
>>ZITTER: Well, thank you
for having me on your show.
I'm very, very appreciative.
>>NOORY: And I hope even
one patient, I think,
is saved by something like this.
>>ZITTER: I hope so, too.
I really hope so, too.
>>NOORY: It makes
a big difference.
It's a fascinating
subject, something
that, ultimately, all of us
will have to face at one time.
And if we do, let's just make
sure that our dying process is
as comfortable as possible.
>>ZITTER: That's right.
>>NOORY: I'm George
Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME PLAYING]